---
title: Magnetic reconnection and the structure of the magnetopause
author: Kyle Murphy
layout: post
---

In this week’s seminar Dr. Jim Drake discussed magnetic reconnection starting with the basics and then moving to state-of-the-art simulations and observations from NASA's Magnetospheric Multiscale Mission (MMS). Jim began with a brief overview of the Dungey cycle, day and nightside reconnection, and the physics of classic resistive MHD reconnection which is intrinsically “slow” and produces unrealistic reconnection rates. He then highlighted results from Phan et al. (2006) which demonstrated that while we often think of reconnection as a microscale processes it is in fact macroscopic and can occur across large regions of the magnetopause. Jim then discussed Hall reconnection and multi island (or multi x-line) reconnection focussing on how these mechanisms allow for faster reconnection rates then traditional MHD reconnection. From here Jim discussed two fluid reconnection and the decoupling of electrons and ions in the electron diffusion region which leads to faster reconnection rates and the formation of the Hall magnetic field; he then briefly discussed what “breaks” field lines in reconnection (electron momentum transport and/or anomalous resistivity in the form of turbulence). Jim went on to contrast MMS observations with results from simulations of reconnection and the electron diffusion region. Here, Jim highlighted that observations showed stagnation points and current peaks earthwards of the magnetopause, large electric fields, intense bipolar currents, dissipation at locations away from the X-line, and crescent shaped electron distributions which the early simulations did not predict. Jim demonstrated that the crescent distributions were the result of the normal electric field developing around the reconnection site and that the bipolar current signatures were the result of oscillating electrons. Jim continued by discussing MMS observations quantifying the local reconnection rate and finished with a short discussion of electron only reconnection. In his final slide Jim provided a short summary of his seminar and highlighted many issues that remain unresolved in reconnection.  

You can find a recording of Jim's seminar on our [YouTube channel][1] and a copy of his talk [here][2].


[1]:https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCNlOK9mCmI3V111EHQRCuEQ
[2]:https://github.com/MSOLSS/MagSeminars/blob/master/presentations/drake_magnetosphere.pdf