---
title: Convection and Substorms
author: Kyle Murphy
layout: post
---

Dr. Christine Gabrielse gave an extraordinary overview of convection and substorms and how the two phenomena fit into both past and future seminars apart of the series. Christine's seminar focussed on providing a broad but thorough overview of convection and substorms. She began with a discussion of the Dungey cycle and and link to large scale convection and magnetic flux transport in the coupled solar wind-magnetosphere system. Christine then expanded on the details of large scale convection in the magnetosphere, it's link to the ionosphere and convection cells (as observed by ground-based radars) in magnetosphere-ionosphere (MI) coupling. She continued her overview of the large scale dynamics of convection with a description of particle motion in the magnetosphere and how the superposition of ExB drift (due to the convection and corotational electric fields) and gradient curvature drift (a result of the non-uniform magnetospheric electric field) lead to large scale motion of plasma in the magnetosphere. Christine followed this up by moving to smaller scales and discussing mesoscale convection, the transport of flux and plasma by transient processes which can account for a signficant portion of the overal convection of magnetic flux and plasma in the magnetosphere. She further discussed how mesoscale convection occurs on both the day and night side magnetosphere and provided an overview of a number of processes responsible for mesoscale convection including bursty bulk flows and flux transport events. Following mesoscale convection Chrsitine provided a thorough overview of substorms including: the substorm growth, expansion, and recovery phases; the substorm timing dilema; dipolarizations, flow channels, and magnetic flux pileup; the substorm current wedge; and substorm aurora. Christine completed her overview with a discussion of convection and ionpshereic feedback, MI coupling, and plasma and particle transport. In her final slide Christine discussed recent work at GEM on mesoscale convection and the role of convection in radiation belt dynamics, advancement in magnetospheric modeling as well as a look to the future and importance of multi-point missions to further our understanding of convection and substorms. 

You can watch Christine's seminar on our YouTube channel and you can find a copy of her talk (with a number of references for further reading) here.

###