---
title: Diagnosing Geospace Dynamics with Magnetometer Arrays
author: Kyle Murphy
layout: post
---

The volume encompassed by the Earth's magnetosphere is large and sparsely populated by in-situ observations making it, at times, difficult to characterize the macro, meso, and global scale dynamics of the system. In this week’s seminar Dr. Ian Mann discussed the utility of ground-based magnetometer arrays to characterize geospace dynamic’s and complement in-situ observations. The magnetosphere and ionosphere are coupled together via magnetic field lines which support both field-aligned currents and waves. These current systems and waves can be observed on the ground using both fluxgate and search coil magnetometers, and with careful mapping of magnetic field lines, these observations can be used to diagnose and quantify magnetospheric activity. In his talk Ian focussed on four research topics, energy input into the magnetospheric system, characterizing magnetospheric substorms, storm-time magnetosphere dynamics, and magneto-seismology. Solar wind energy can couple to the magnetosphere system via the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability and solar wind impulses; these processes generate Ultra-Low Frequency (ULF) waves which in turn couple to Field Line Resonances (FLRs). Ian demonstrated how a latitudinal array of ground-based magnetometers can be used to diagnose and quantify these FLRs and hence the transfer of energy from the solar wind to the magnetosphere system. He further highlighted how this transfer of energy and the corresponding waves may be able to drive large goemagnetically induced currents on the flanks which can also be characterized by ground-based magnetometers. Ian then discussed how a dense array of ground-based magnetometers may be used to characterize the spatio-temporal dynamics of impulsive ULF waves at substorms onset. With careful analysis ground-based magnetometers can determine the location and time of substorm expansion phase onset in the ionosphere, which is collocated with auroral beads. Following substorms, Ian discussed the utility of ground-based magnetometers in the study of storm-time radiation belt dynamics and in particular the role of ULF waves in energetic electron enhancements, and the utility of ground-based magnetometers to quantify ULF wave radial diffusion coefficients for use in radiation belt simulations. Ian finished his talk with a brief discussion of magneto-seismology, the cross-phase technique, and diagnosing the spatio-temporal structure of the plasmasphere with ground-based magnetometers. 

You can find a recording of Ian's seminar on our [YouTube channel][1] and a copy of his talk [here][2].


[1]:https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCNlOK9mCmI3V111EHQRCuEQ
[2]:https://github.com/MSOLSS/MagSeminars/blob/master/presentations/Mann-Magnetometer-Seminar-Series-Nov-2020.pdf