---
title: Radiation Belts
author: Kyle Murphy
layout: post
---

In this week’s seminar Dr. Drew Turner discussed the radiation belts at the Earth, throughout the solar system, and into the cosmos. Drew started his talk with a brief history of the discovery of the radiation belts by Sputnik-2 and Explorer-1 in the 1950s. Drew continued with a description of trapped particle motion in the inner-magnetosphere and the three periodic trajectories, (i) gyro motion around a field line, (ii) bounce motion along a field line, and (iii) gradient curvature drift around the earth. These periodic trajectories allow researchers to define three adiabatic invariants that describe the motion and dynamics of energetic particle in the Earth's radiation belts. Drew went on to discuss Cosmic Ray Albedo Neutron Decay (CRAND),  diffusive transport within the Earth's radiation belts, and how phase space density (PSD) profiles evolve as a result of wave-particle interactions and magnetospheric dynamics via outward radial diffusion, slow and fast losses, local acceleration, and rapid changes in PSD at the boundary of the radiation belts. He followed this with a brief discussion and some examples of wave-particle interactions in the Earth's radiation belt. Drew then discussed seminal observations from the CRESS and Sampex satellites highlighting how variable the outer radiation belt can be – electron flux varying by several orders of magnitude on the time scales of hours and days. This extreme variation was also highlighted by Van Allen Probes observations; however, the Van Allen Probes further demonstrated that this variability exists across a range of energies from a 100s of KeV to multiple MeV. Drew continued with a brief discussion of inner radiation belt protons and electrons emphasizing that inner belt electrons are confined to energies less than 1.5 MeV, and the role of Sudden Particle Enhancements at Low L-Shells (SPELLS) in filling the radiation belt slot region. Drew continued by highlighting novel results from the Van Allen Era of radiation belt research including: the role of radial diffusion and local acceleration in radiation belt dynamics; the importance of substorms to the outer radiation belt; an overview of radiation belt loss and dropouts; and the storm-time response of the radiation belts. Drew concluded his seminar with a brief description of the radiation belts throughout the solar system and into the cosmos, and a short discussion of the future of radiation belt research.

You can find a copy of Drew's seminar on our [YouTube channel][1] and a link to his talk [here][2].

[1]:https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCNlOK9mCmI3V111EHQRCuEQ
[2]:https://github.com/MSOLSS/MagSeminars/blob/master/presentations/Turner_RadiationBelts_GSFCLectureSeries_20200914.pdf