---
title: Global MHD
author: Kyle Murphy
layout: post
---

This week Professor Jimmy Reader provided a comprehensive review of Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) and Global MHD models. Jimmy's seminar focussed on the _guts_ of MHD models and global simulations but also provided a brief overview of the basic MHD equations. He highlighted that MHD equations were the conservation equations for mass, momentum, energy, and magnetic flux which are derived from the Vlasov (or Boltzman) equation and Maxwell’s equations. In MHD these equations are simplified (for instance, by neglecting the displacement current) so that they still capture relevant physics at the macro and meso scales (on the order of but less then an Earth Radii) but neglect physics at the micro scale (electron and ion gyro radius). Jimmy then briefly discussed the derivation of the MHD equations in order to provide a detailed overview of the limitations and assumptions of MHD. He then moved into a discussion of numerical solutions to the MHD equations covering grid selection (which is one of the main differences of the various Global MHD models), error terms and the trade-off between accuracy, stability, dispersion, and diffusion, conservation of magnetic flux, and popular numerical schemes. Following this Jimmy provided a detailed overview of reconnection in Global MHD. In MHD it is impossible for reconnection to occur; however, because all MHD codes have numerical resistivity they are able to produce numerical reconnection. This numerical reconnection is sometimes further enhanced by adding extra (or anomalous) resistive to models. Jimmy then transitioned to the _global_ nature of Global MHD codes discussing coupling magnetospheric dynamics to the ionosphere, including precipitation in models and the feedback of the ionosphere on the magnetosphere, and finally _putting it all together_. With everything _put together_ Jimmy went over a few examples of Global MHD models and simulations including investigating: ionospheric feed back on the global response of the magnetosphere; analyzing the dynamics of nightside plasma injections, bursty bulk flows, and bubbles and their role in global plasma transport in the magnetosphere; and comparing magnetospheric dynamics with ionospheric and auroral dynamics. Jimmy finished his talk with a brief summary and some final thoughts on what's next in and for Global MHD modeling.   

You can find a recording of Jimmy's seminar on our [YouTube channel][1] and a copy of his talk [here][2].

[1]:https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCNlOK9mCmI3V111EHQRCuEQ
[2]:https://github.com/MSOLSS/MagSeminars/blob/master/presentations/