---
title: Planetary Magnetospheres 
author: Nithin Sivadas
layout: post
---

Professor Fran Bagenal gives us a tour of planetary magnetospheres within our solar system. Through her talk, she focuses on four main questions: What causes the differences between the magnetospheres? What controls their sizes and dynamics? And what are the different sources of their plasma? As she outlines the magnetospheres of Mercury to Neptune, she discusses the magnetospheres of Jupiter and Saturn in more detail. She contrasts them between each other and with Earth's magnetosphere.

Firstly, she discusses the curious case of Venus and Mars, two different planets in terms of their size and mass. However, both lack a strong magnetic field. Though one can explain away the absence of a magnetic-field generating dynamo in Mars due to its small size resulting in faster cooling of the core, the same cannot be said for Venus since its size is comparable to Earth. She points out that perhaps a lack of convection in the core could be a culprit. In contrast to these inner planets, Mercury, and Jupiter's moon Ganymede, are two small bodies with active magnetospheres.

Moving onto the gas giants, Prof. Bagenal emphasizes the difference in Jupiter and Earth's dynamo sizes, Jupiter's being considerably stronger due to the planet's size and mass. While in Earth's magnetosphere, the plasma sources are mainly the ionosphere and the solar wind, Jupiter's primary source is the seismically active moon Io, spewing volcanic gases at a rate of 1 ton per second. Io produces the plasma torus that co-rotates with Jupiter with a total mass of 1.5 megatonnes. Furthermore, strong currents of 3 Million Amperes flow between Io and Jupiter's atmosphere, triggering radio emissions and visible aurora. Modeling the Plasma-Io interactions is an active area of study. How Io's volcanic activity affects Jupiter's magnetosphere is still unclear, and studying it requires collaboration between disparate fields such as volcanism, atmospheric physics, and plasma physics.

Another systems-level variable that is different between the planetary magnetospheres is the coupling between plasmas. Prof. Bagenal points out three main plasma couplings and their associated control dynamics.

1. The Dungey Circulation, controlled by the solar wind-Ionosphere coupling. At Jupiter, unlike Earth, the Dungey cycle isn't driven by dayside reconnection since the solar wind doesn't remain steady over the time-scales of the circulation (~5 hours), as opposed to that of the Earth, which is only about an hour.
2. The co-rotation of the plasmasphere, that is determined by ionosphere-magnetosphere coupling. The decoupling of which in Jupiter causes current-flow and strong aurora.
3. The viscous interactions caused by the solar wind coupling with the magnetosphere.

As Dr. Bagenal moves onto Saturn, she explains how despite its similarity to Jupiter's size, the planet has a much smaller magnetosphere due to the smaller volume of metallic hydrogen in its core. Additionally, the moon Enceladus contributes to the matter in its magnetosphere. It produces less material than Io but far more neutrals. Hence, Saturn's magnetosphere is dominated by neutrals, while Jupiter's magnetosphere is dominated by high beta and energetic plasma.

Finally, Prof. Bagenal concludes the seminar with a discussion on Uranus and Neptune. With no metallic hydrogen in their core and with an abundance of water, ammonia, and methane, scientists believe that weak magnetic fields, observed by Voyager 2, are generated by dynamos within the weakly conducting ionic water.

You can find the recording of Prof. Bagenal's seminar on our [YouTube Channel][1].

[1]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AJz5gIQwats
