---
title: Early Career Abstracts
layout: "page"
icon: fas fa-file-alt
order: 3
---

<h2>Early Career Seminars are held the first monday of every month.</h2>

<h3>Leon Olifer</h3>

The beginning of the space race marked a new chapter in human history. However, new possibilities are always associated with new challenges. One of the most serious is space radiation, which was discovered early in the space race and is still treated as a major hazard for the operation of satellites, and for human space exploration, today. In particular, so-called “satellite killer” electron radiation, trapped around Earth, can critically damage the electronic components onboard spacecraft, leading to reduced operational capabilities or even catastrophic failures. If multiple satellites are affected by severe levels of killer electrons at once, the impact on 21st-century technological infrastructure could be disastrous. Services that rely on satellite infrastructure could all be interrupted, or in the worse case potentially completely destroyed. This study focuses on determining what might control the extremes of this radiation, and indeed whether there is a predictable “worst case”. By statistically analyzing measurements from the NASA Van Allen Probes mission we show that the electron radiation around the Earth naturally limits itself at a fixed level that cannot be surpassed even during very intense geomagnetic storms. Remarkably, this maximum radiation level is consistent with a largely untested theory derived by Kennel and Petschek (1966) more than 50 years ago. Here, we show that during typical geomagnetic activity, the electrons with energies ~700 keV almost always reach but never exceed this level, meanwhile, the higher energy electrons have fluxes that typically stay well below it. Only on very rare occasions during the most intense geomagnetic storms of the Van Allen Probe era from 2012-2019 did electrons with energies up to 2000 keV reach this Kennel-Petschek limit; while at higher energies they never did. The validation of the Kennel-Petschek theory implies that there may be a natural worse case to the level of electron space radiation, aiding in the design of radiation-tolerant satellites or space stations. Since no current radiation belt models include the non-linear saturation of the Kennel-Petschek theory, its impacts appear to be essential for understanding and accurately predicting the absolute limits of the most extreme electron space radiation.

<h3>Riley Troyer</h3>

Not all aurora (northern lights) are bright and defined curtains of light. Diffuse aurora are more modest. Barely visible to the naked eye, they spread across large portions of the night sky and can be easily overlooked. Pulsating aurora are a common and more playful type of diffuse aurora. In one of these displays, widely varying patches of aurora blink on and off with with periods ranging up to 20 seconds. While they aren't as bright, it has been suspected that the electrons which cause pulsating aurora are much more energetic than other types of aurora. Since energetic electrons move faster and thus can reach further into the atmosphere, it is possible that pulsating aurora may affect terrestrial climate. They are also likely important to how energy is transferred from the magnetosphere to ionosphere. To study this, we first need a better understanding of pulsating aurora energies and how they can vary. In this study, we looked at the inverted energies of 55 pulsating aurora events using the Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter Radar. In doing so, we confirmed the energetic nature of pulsating aurora. We also found that the most energetic events happen close in time to a magnetic disturbance known as a substorm and that a stronger disturbance leads to higher energies.
